# Chapter 1: Getting started with C++
## Section 1.1: Hello World
This program prints Hello World! to the standard output stream:
```CPP
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
std::cout << "Hello World!" << std::endl;
}
```


## Section 1.2: Comments
A comment is a way to put arbitrary text inside source code without having the C++ compiler interpret it with any
functional meaning. Comments are used to give insight into the design or method of a program.
There are two types of comments in C++:
 * Single-Line Comments
The double forward-slash sequence // will mark all text until a newline as a comment:
```CPP
int main()
{
// This is a single-line comment.
int a; // this also is a single-line comment
int i; // this is another single-line comment
}
```

 * C-Style/Block Comments
The sequence /* is used to declare the start of the comment block and the sequence */ is used to declare the end
of comment. All text between the start and end sequences is interpreted as a comment, even if the text is
otherwise valid C++ syntax. These are sometimes called "C-style" comments, as this comment syntax is inherited
from C :
```CPP
int main()
{
/*
* This is a block comment.
*/
int a;
}
```

## Section 1.3: The standard C++ compilation process
Executable C++ program code is usually produced by a compiler.
A compiler is a program that translates code from a programming language into another form which is (more)
directly executable for a computer. Using a compiler to translate code is called compilation.
C++ inherits the form of its compilation process from its "parent" language, C. Below is a list showing the four major
steps of compilation in C++:
1. The C++ preprocessor copies the contents of any included header files into the source code file, generates
macro code, and replaces symbolic constants defined using #define with their values.
2. The expanded source code file produced by the C++ preprocessor is compiled into assembly language
appropriate for the platform.
3. The assembler code generated by the compiler is assembled into appropriate object code for the platform.
4. The object code file generated by the assembler is linked together with the object code files for any library
functions used to produce an executable file.
Note: some compiled code is linked together, but not to create a final program. Usually, this "linked" code
can also be packaged into a format that can be used by other programs. This "bundle of packaged, usable
code" is what C++ programmers refer to as a library.
Many C++ compilers may also merge or un-merge certain parts of the compilation process for ease or for additional
analysis. Many C++ programmers will use different tools, but all of the tools will generally follow this generalized
process when they are involved in the production of a program


## Section 1.4: Function
A function is a unit of code that represents a sequence of statements.
Functions can accept arguments or values and return a single value (or not). To use a function, a function call is
used on argument values and the use of the function call itself is replaced with its return value.
Every function has a type signature -- the types of its arguments and the type of its return type.
Functions are inspired by the concepts of the procedure and the mathematical function.
Note: C++ functions are essentially procedures and do not follow the exact definition or rules of
mathematical functions.

Functions are often meant to perform a specific task. and can be called from other parts of a program. A function
must be declared and defined before it is called elsewhere in a program.
Note: popular function definitions may be hidden in other included files (often for convenience and reuse
across many files). This is a common use of header files.

1. Function Declaration
A function declaration is declares the existence of a function with its name and type signature to the compiler.

The syntax is as the following:
    int add2(int i); // The function is of the type (int) -> (int)
In the example above, the int add2(int i) function declares the following to the compiler:
- The return type is int.
- The name of the function is add2.
- The number of arguments to the function is 1:
    - The first argument is of the type int.
    - The first argument will be referred to in the function's contents by the name i.

The argument name is optional; the declaration for the function could also be the following:
    int add2(int); // Omitting the function arguments' name is also permitted.
Per the one-definition rule, a function with a certain type signature can only be declared or defined once in an
entire C++ code base visible to the C++ compiler. In other words, functions with a specific type signature cannot be
re-defined -- they must only be defined once. Thus, the following is not valid C++:
    int add2(int i); // The compiler will note that add2 is a function (int) -> int
    int add2(int j); // As add2 already has a definition of (int) -> int, the compiler
    // will regard this as an error.
If a function returns nothing, its return type is written as void. If it takes no parameters, the parameter list should
be empty.

    void do_something(); // The function takes no parameters, and does not return anything.
// Note that it can still affect variables it has access to.

2. Function Call
A function can be called after it has been declared. For example, the following program calls add2 with the value of
2 within the function of main:
```CPP
#include <iostream>
int add2(int i); // Declaration of add2
// Note: add2 is still missing a DEFINITION.
// Even though it doesn't appear directly in code,
// add2's definition may be LINKED in from another object file.
int main()
{
std::cout << add2(2) << "\n"; // add2(2) will be evaluated at this point,
// and the result is printed.
return 0;
}
```
Here, add2(2) is the syntax for a function call.


3. Function Definition
A function definition* is similar to a declaration, except it also contains the code that is executed when the function
is called within its body.
An example of a function definition for add2 might be:
```CPP
int add2(int i) // Data that is passed into (int i) will be referred to by the name i
{ // while in the function's curly brackets or "scope."
int j = i + 2; // Definition of a variable j as the value of i+2.
return j; // Returning or, in essence, substitution of j for a function call to
// add2.
}
```

1. Function Overloading
You can create multiple functions with the same name but different parameters.
```CPP
int add2(int i) // Code contained in this definition will be evaluated
{ // when add2() is called with one parameter.
int j = i + 2;
return j;
}
int add2(int i, int j) // However, when add2() is called with two parameters, the
{ // code from the initial declaration will be overloaded,
int k = i + j + 2 ; // and the code in this declaration will be evaluated
return k; // instead.
}
```
Both functions are called by the same name add2, but the actual function that is called depends directly on the
amount and type of the parameters in the call. In most cases, the C++ compiler can compute which function to call.
In some cases, the type must be explicitly stated.

4. Default Parameters
Default values for function parameters can only be specified in function declarations.
```CPP
int multiply(int a, int b = 7); // b has default value of 7.
int multiply(int a, int b)
{
return a * b; // If multiply() is called with one parameter, the
} // value will be multiplied by the default, 7.
```
In this example, multiply() can be called with one or two parameters. If only one parameter is given, b will have
default value of 7. Default arguments must be placed in the latter arguments of the function. For example:
    int multiply(int a = 10, int b = 20); // This is legal
    int multiply(int a = 10, int b); // This is illegal since int a is in the former

5. Special Function Calls - Operators
There exist special function calls in C++ which have different syntax than name_of_function(value1, value2,
value3). The most common example is that of operators.

Certain special character sequences that will be reduced to function calls by the compiler, such as !, +, -
, *, %, and << and many more. These special characters are normally associated with non-programming usage or are
used for aesthetics (e.g. the + character is commonly recognized as the addition symbol both within C++
programming as well as in elementary math).
C++ handles these character sequences with a special syntax; but, in essence, each occurrence of an operator is
reduced to a function call. For example, the following C++ expression:
3+3
is equivalent to the following function call:
operator+(3, 3)
All operator function names start with operator.
While in C++'s immediate predecessor, C, operator function names cannot be assigned different meanings by
providing additional definitions with different type signatures, in C++, this is valid. "Hiding" additional function
definitions under one unique function name is referred to as operator overloading in C++, and is a relatively
common, but not universal, convention in C++.



## Section 1.5: Visibility of function prototypes and declarations
In C++, code must be declared or defined before usage. For example, the following produces a compile time error:
```CPP
int main()
{
foo(2); // error: foo is called, but has not yet been declared
}
void foo(int x) // this later definition is not known in main
{
}
```
There are two ways to resolve this: putting either the definition or declaration of foo() before its usage in main().
Here is one example:
```CPP
void foo(int x) {} //Declare the foo function and body first
int main()
{
foo(2); // OK: foo is completely defined beforehand, so it can be called here.
}
```
However it is also possible to "forward-declare" the function by putting only a "prototype" declaration before its
usage and then defining the function body later:
void foo(int); // Prototype declaration of foo, seen by main
// Must specify return type, name, and argument list types
```CPP
int main()
{
foo(2); // OK: foo is known, called even though its body is not yet defined
}
void foo(int x) //Must match the prototype
{
// Define body of foo here
}
```
The prototype must specify the return type (void), the name of the function (foo), and the argument list variable
types (int), but the names of the arguments are NOT required.
One common way to integrate this into the organization of source files is to make a header file containing all of the
prototype declarations:
// foo.h
void foo(int); // prototype declaration
and then provide the full definition elsewhere:
// foo.cpp --> foo.o
#include "foo.h" // foo's prototype declaration is "hidden" in here
void foo(int x) { } // foo's body definition
and then, once compiled, link the corresponding object file foo.o into the compiled object file where it is used in
the linking phase, main.o:
// main.cpp --> main.o
#include "foo.h" // foo's prototype declaration is "hidden" in here
int main() { foo(2); } // foo is valid to call because its prototype declaration was beforehand.
// the prototype and body definitions of foo are linked through the object files
An “unresolved external symbol” error occurs when the function prototype and call exist, but the function body is
not defined. These can be trickier to resolve as the compiler won't report the error until the final linking stage, and
it doesn't know which line to jump to in the code to show the error.
Section 1.6: Preprocessor
The preprocessor is an important part of the compiler.
It edits the source code, cutting some bits out, changing others, and adding other things.
In source files, we can include preprocessor directives. These directives tells the preprocessor to perform specific
actions. A directive starts with a # on a new line. Example:
```CPP 
#define ZERO 0 
```
The first preprocessor directive you will meet is probably the
```CPP
#include <something>
```
directive. What it does is takes all of something and inserts it in your file where the directive was. The hello world
program starts with the line
```CPP
#include <iostream>
```
This line adds the functions and objects that let you use the standard input and output.
The C language, which also uses the preprocessor, does not have as many header files as the C++ language, but in
C++ you can use all the C header files.
The next important directive is probably the
```CPP
#define something something_else
```
directive. This tells the preprocessor that as it goes along the file, it should replace every occurrence of something
with something_else. It can also make things similar to functions, but that probably counts as advanced C++.
The something_else is not needed, but if you define something as nothing, then outside preprocessor directives, all
occurrences of something will vanish.
This actually is useful, because of the #if,#else and #ifdef directives. The format for these would be the following:
```CPP
#if something==true
//code
#else
//more code
#endif
#ifdef thing_that_you_want_to_know_if_is_defined
//code
#endif
```
These directives insert the code that is in the true bit, and deletes the false bits. this can be used to have bits of
code that are only included on certain operating systems, without having to rewrite the whole code.




# Chapter 2: Templates
Classes, functions, and (since C++14) variables can be templated. A template is a piece of code with some free
parameters that will become a concrete class, function, or variable when all parameters are specified. Parameters
can be types, values, or themselves templates. A well-known template is std::vector, which becomes a concrete
container type when the element type is specified, e.g., std::vector<int>.
## Section 2.1: Basic Class Template
The basic idea of a class template is that the template parameter gets substituted by a type at compile time. The
result is that the same class can be reused for multiple types. The user specifies which type will be used when a
variable of the class is declared. Three examples of this are shown in main():
```CPP
#include <iostream>
using std::cout;
template <typename T> // A simple class to hold one number of any type
class Number {
public:
void setNum(T n); // Sets the class field to the given number
T plus1() const; // returns class field's "follower"
private:
T num; // Class field
};
template <typename T> // Set the class field to the given number
void Number<T>::setNum(T n) {
num = n;
}
template <typename T> // returns class field's "follower"
T Number<T>::plus1() const {
return num + 1;
}

int main() {
Number<int> anInt; // Test with an integer (int replaces T in the class)
anInt.setNum(1);
cout << "My integer + 1 is " << anInt.plus1() << "\n"; // Prints 2
Number<double> aDouble; // Test with a double
aDouble.setNum(3.1415926535897);
cout << "My double + 1 is " << aDouble.plus1() << "\n"; // Prints 4.14159
Number<float> aFloat; // Test with a float
aFloat.setNum(1.4);
cout << "My float + 1 is " << aFloat.plus1() << "\n"; // Prints 2.4
return 0; // Successful completion
}
```

## Section 2.2: Function Templates
Templating can also be applied to functions (as well as the more traditional structures) with the same effect.
// 'T' stands for the unknown type
// Both of our arguments will be of the same type.
```CPP
template<typename T>
void printSum(T add1, T add2)
{
std::cout << (add1 + add2) << std::endl;
}
```
This can then be used in the same way as structure templates.
```CPP
printSum<int>(4, 5);
printSum<float>(4.5f, 8.9f);
```
In both these case the template argument is used to replace the types of the parameters; the result works just like
a normal C++ function (if the parameters don't match the template type the compiler applies the standard
conversions).
One additional property of template functions (unlike template classes) is that the compiler can infer the template
parameters based on the parameters passed to the function.
```CPP
printSum(4, 5); // Both parameters are int.
// This allows the compiler deduce that the type
// T is also int.
printSum(5.0, 4); // In this case the parameters are two different types.
// The compiler is unable to deduce the type of T
// because there are contradictions. As a result
// this is a compile time error.
```
This feature allows us to simplify code when we combine template structures and functions. There is a common
pattern in the standard library that allows us to make template structure X using a helper function make_X().
```CPP
// The make_X pattern looks like this.
// 1) A template structure with 1 or more template types.
template<typename T1, typename T2>
struct MyPair
{
T1 first;
T2 second;
};
// 2) A make function that has a parameter type for
// each template parameter in the template structure.
template<typename T1, typename T2>
MyPair<T1, T2> make_MyPair(T1 t1, T2 t2)
{
return MyPair<T1, T2>{t1, t2};
}
How does this help?
auto val1 = MyPair<int, float>{5, 8.7}; // Create object explicitly defining the types
auto val2 = make_MyPair(5, 8.7); // Create object using the types of the paramters.
// In this code both val1 and val2 are the same
// type.
```
Note: This is not designed to shorten the code. This is designed to make the code more robust. It allows the types
to be changed by changing the code in a single place rather than in multiple locations.

## Section 2.3: Variadic template data structures
Version ≥ C++14
It is often useful to define classes or structures that have a variable number and type of data members which are
defined at compile time. The canonical example is std::tuple, but sometimes is it is necessary to define your own
custom structures. Here is an example that defines the structure using compounding (rather than inheritance as
with std::tuple. Start with the general (empty) definition, which also serves as the base-case for recrusion
termination in the later specialisation:
```CPP
template<typename ... T>
struct DataStructure {};
```
This already allows us to define an empty structure, DataStructure<> data, albeit that isn't very useful yet.
Next comes the recursive case specialisation:
```CPP
template<typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct DataStructure<T, Rest ...>
{
DataStructure(const T& first, const Rest& ... rest)
: first(first)
, rest(rest...)
{}
T first;
DataStructure<Rest ... > rest;
};
```
This is now sufficient for us to create arbitrary data structures, like DataStructure<int, float, std::string>
data(1, 2.1, "hello").
So what's going on? First, note that this is a specialisation whose requirement is that at least one variadic template
parameter (namely T above) exists, whilst not caring about the specific makeup of the pack Rest. Knowing that T
exists allows the definition of its data member, first. The rest of the data is recursively packaged as
DataStructure<Rest ... > rest. The constructor initiates both of those members, including a recursive
constructor call to the rest member.
To understand this better, we can work through an example: suppose you have a declaration DataStructure<int,
float> data. The declaration first matches against the specialisation, yielding a structure with int first and
DataStructure<float> rest data members. The rest definition again matches this specialisation, creating its own
float first and DataStructure<> rest members. Finally this last rest matches against the base-case defintion,
producing an empty structure.
You can visualise this as follows:
DataStructure<int, float>
-> int first
-> DataStructure<float> rest
-> float first
-> DataStructure<> rest
-> (empty)
Now we have the data structure, but its not terribly useful yet as we cannot easily access the individual data
elements (for example to access the last member of DataStructure<int, float, std::string> data we would
have to use data.rest.rest.first, which is not exactly user-friendly). So we add a get method to it (only needed
C++ Notes for Professionals 14
in the specialisation as the base-case structure has no data to get):
```CPP
template<typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct DataStructure<T, Rest ...>
{
...
template<size_t idx>
auto get()
{
return GetHelper<idx, DataStructure<T,Rest...>>::get(*this);
}
...
};
```
As you can see this get member function is itself templated - this time on the index of the member that is needed
(so usage can be things like data.get<1>(), similar to std::tuple). The actual work is done by a static function in a
helper class, GetHelper. The reason we can't define the required functionality directly in DataStructure's get is
because (as we will shortly see) we would need to specialise on idx - but it isn't possible to specialise a template
member function without specialising the containing class template. Note also the use of a C++14-style auto here
makes our lives significantly simpler as otherwise we would need quite a complicated expression for the return
type.
So on to the helper class. This time we will need an empty forward declaration and two specialisations. First the
declaration:
```CPP
template<size_t idx, typename T>
struct GetHelper;
Now the base-case (when idx==0). In this case we just return the first member:
template<typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct GetHelper<0, DataStructure<T, Rest ... >>
{
static T get(DataStructure<T, Rest...>& data)
{
return data.first;
}
};
```
In the recursive case, we decrement idx and invoke the GetHelper for the rest member:
```CPP
template<size_t idx, typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct GetHelper<idx, DataStructure<T, Rest ... >>
{
static auto get(DataStructure<T, Rest...>& data)
{
return GetHelper<idx-1, DataStructure<Rest ...>>::get(data.rest);
}
};
```
To work through an example, suppose we have DataStructure<int, float> data and we need data.get<1>().
This invokes GetHelper<1, DataStructure<int, float>>::get(data) (the 2nd specialisation), which in turn
invokes GetHelper<0, DataStructure<float>>::get(data.rest), which finally returns (by the 1st specialisation as
now idx is 0) data.rest.first.
So that's it! Here is the whole functioning code, with some example use in the main function:
```CPP
#include <iostream>
template<size_t idx, typename T>
struct GetHelper;
template<typename ... T>
struct DataStructure
{
};
template<typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct DataStructure<T, Rest ...>
{
DataStructure(const T& first, const Rest& ... rest)
: first(first)
, rest(rest...)
{}
T first;
DataStructure<Rest ... > rest;
template<size_t idx>
auto get()
{
return GetHelper<idx, DataStructure<T,Rest...>>::get(*this);
}
};
template<typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct GetHelper<0, DataStructure<T, Rest ... >>
{
static T get(DataStructure<T, Rest...>& data)
{
return data.first;
}
};
template<size_t idx, typename T, typename ... Rest>
struct GetHelper<idx, DataStructure<T, Rest ... >>
{
static auto get(DataStructure<T, Rest...>& data)
{
return GetHelper<idx-1, DataStructure<Rest ...>>::get(data.rest);
}
};
int main()
{
DataStructure<int, float, std::string> data(1, 2.1, "Hello");
std::cout << data.get<0>() << std::endl;
std::cout << data.get<1>() << std::endl;
std::cout << data.get<2>() << std::endl;
return 0;
}
```

## Section 2.4: Argument forwarding
Template may accept both lvalue and rvalue references using forwarding reference:
```CPP
template <typename T>
void f(T &&t);
In this case, the real type of t will be deduced depending on the context:
struct X { };
X x;
f(x); // calls f<X&>(x)
f(X()); // calls f<X>(x)
```
In the first case, the type T is deduced as reference to X (X&), and the type of t is lvalue reference to X, while in the
second case the type of T is deduced as X and the type of t as rvalue reference to X (X&&).
Note: It is worth noticing that in the first case, decltype(t) is the same as T, but not in the second.
In order to perfectly forward t to another function ,whether it is an lvalue or rvalue reference, one must use
std::forward:
```CPP
template <typename T>
void f(T &&t) {
g(std::forward<T>(t));
}
Forwarding references may be used with variadic templates:
template <typename... Args>
void f(Args&&... args) {
g(std::forward<Args>(args)...);
}
```
Note: Forwarding references can only be used for template parameters, for instance, in the following code, v is a
rvalue reference, not a forwarding reference:
```CPP
#include <vector>
template <typename T>
void f(std::vector<T> &&v);
```

## Section 2.5: Partial template specialization
In contrast of a full template specialization partial template specialization allows to introduce template with some of
the arguments of existing template fixed. Partial template specialization is only available for template class/structs:
```CPP
// Common case:
template<typename T, typename U>
struct S {
T t_val;
U u_val;
};
// Special case when the first template argument is fixed to int
template<typename V>
struct S<int, V> {
double another_value;
int foo(double arg) {// Do something}
};
```
As shown above, partial template specializations may introduce completely different sets of data and function
members.
When a partially specialized template is instantiated, the most suitable specialization is selected. For example, let's
define a template and two partial specializations:
```CPP
template<typename T, typename U, typename V>
struct S {
static void foo() {
std::cout << "General case\n";
}
};
template<typename U, typename V>
struct S<int, U, V> {
static void foo() {
std::cout << "T = int\n";
}
};
template<typename V>
struct S<int, double, V> {
static void foo() {
std::cout << "T = int, U = double\n";
}
};
```
Now the following calls:
```CPP
S<std::string, int, double>::foo();
S<int, float, std::string>::foo();
S<int, double, std::string>::foo();
```
will print
General case
```CPP
T = int
T = int, U = double
```
Function templates may only be fully specialized:
```CPP
template<typename T, typename U>
void foo(T t, U u) {
std::cout << "General case: " << t << " " << u << std::endl;
}
// OK.
template<>
void foo<int, int>(int a1, int a2) {
std::cout << "Two ints: " << a1 << " " << a2 << std::endl;
}
void invoke_foo() {
foo(1, 2.1); // Prints "General case: 1 2.1"
foo(1,2); // Prints "Two ints: 1 2"
}

// Compilation error: partial function specialization is not allowed.
template<typename U>
void foo<std::string, U>(std::string t, U u) {
std::cout << "General case: " << t << " " << u << std::endl;
}
```

## Section 2.6: Template Specialization
You can define implementation for specific instantiations of a template class/method.
For example if you have:
```CPP
template <typename T>
T sqrt(T t) { /* Some generic implementation */ }
```
You can then write:
```CPP
template<>
int sqrt<int>(int i) { /* Highly optimized integer implementation */ }
```
Then a user that writes sqrt(4.0) will get the generic implementation whereas sqrt(4) will get the specialized
implementation.

## Section 2.7: Alias template
Version ≥ C++11
Basic example:
```CPP
template<typename T> using pointer = T*;
```
This definition makes pointer<T> an alias of T*. For example:
```CPP
pointer<int> p = new int; // equivalent to: int* p = new int;
```
Alias templates cannot be specialized. However, that functionality can be obtained indirectly by having them refer
to a nested type in a struct:
```CPP
template<typename T>
struct nonconst_pointer_helper { typedef T* type; };
template<typename T>
struct nonconst_pointer_helper<T const> { typedef T* type; };
template<typename T> using nonconst_pointer = nonconst_pointer_helper<T>::type;
```

## Section 2.8: Explicit instantiation
An explicit instantiation definition creates and declares a concrete class, function, or variable from a template,
without using it just yet. An explicit instantiation can be referenced from other translation units. This can be used to
avoid defining a template in a header file, if it will only be instantiated with a finite set of arguments. For example:
```CPP
// print_string.h
template <class T>
void print_string(const T* str);
// print_string.cpp
#include "print_string.h"
template void print_string(const char*);
template void print_string(const wchar_t*);
```
Because print_string<char> and print_string<wchar_t> are explicitly instantiated in print_string.cpp, the
linker will be able to find them even though the print_string template is not defined in the header. If these explicit
instantiation declarations were not present, a linker error would likely occur. See Why can templates only be
implemented in the header file?
Version ≥ C++11
If an explicit instantiation definition is preceded by the extern keyword, it becomes an explicit instantiation
declaration instead. The presence of an explicit instantiation declaration for a given specialization prevents the
implicit instantiation of the given specialization within the current translation unit. Instead, a reference to that
specialization that would otherwise cause an implicit instantiation can refer to an explicit instantiation definition in
the same or another TU.
foo.h
```CPP
#ifndef FOO_H
#define FOO_H
template <class T> void foo(T x) {
// complicated implementation
}
#endif
```
foo.cpp
```CPP
#include "foo.h"
// explicit instantiation definitions for common cases
template void foo(int);
template void foo(double);
```
main.cpp
```CPP
#include "foo.h"
// we already know foo.cpp has explicit instantiation definitions for these
extern template void foo(double);
int main() {
foo(42); // instantiates foo<int> here;
// wasteful since foo.cpp provides an explicit instantiation already!
foo(3.14); // does not instantiate foo<double> here;
// uses instantiation of foo<double> in foo.cpp instead
}
```

## Section 2.9: Non-type template parameter
Apart from types as a template parameter we are allowed to declare values of constant expressions meeting one of
the following criteria:
integral or enumeration type,
pointer to object or pointer to function,
lvalue reference to object or lvalue reference to function,
pointer to member,
std::nullptr_t.
Like all template parameters, non-type template parameters can be explicitly specified, defaulted, or derived
implicitly via Template Argument Deduction.
Example of non-type template parameter usage:
```CPP
#include <iostream>
template<typename T, std::size_t size>
std::size_t size_of(T (&anArray)[size]) // Pass array by reference. Requires.
{ // an exact size. We allow all sizes
return size; // by using a template "size".
}
int main()
{
char anArrayOfChar[15];
std::cout << "anArrayOfChar: " << size_of(anArrayOfChar) << "\n";
int anArrayOfData[] = {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9};
std::cout << "anArrayOfData: " << size_of(anArrayOfData) << "\n";
}
```
Example of explicitly specifying both type and non-type template parameters:
```CPP
#include <array>
int main ()
{
std::array<int, 5> foo; // int is a type parameter, 5 is non-type
}
```
Non-type template parameters are one of the ways to achieve template recurrence and enables to do
Metaprogramming.

## Section 2.10: Declaring non-type template arguments with auto
Prior to C++17, when writing a template non-type parameter, you had to specify its type first. So a common pattern
became writing something like:
```CPP
template <class T, T N>
struct integral_constant {
using type = T;
static constexpr T value = N;
};
using five = integral_constant<int, 5>;
```
But for complicated expressions, using something like this involves having to write decltype(expr), expr when
instantiating templates. The solution is to simplify this idiom and simply allow auto:
Version ≥ C++17
```CPP
template <auto N>
struct integral_constant {
using type = decltype(N);
static constexpr type value = N;
};
C++ Notes for Professionals 21
using five = integral_constant<5>;
```
Empty custom deleter for unique_ptr
A nice motivating example can come from trying to combine the empty base optimization with a custom deleter for
unique_ptr. Different C API deleters have different return types, but we don't care - we just want something to
work for any function:
```CPP
template <auto DeleteFn>
struct FunctionDeleter {
template <class T>
void operator()(T* ptr) const {
DeleteFn(ptr);
}
};
template <T, auto DeleteFn>
using unique_ptr_deleter = std::unique_ptr<T, FunctionDeleter<DeleteFn>>;
```
And now you can simply use any function pointer that can take an argument of type T as a template non-type
parameter, regardless of return type, and get a no-size overhead unique_ptr out of it:
```CPP
unique_ptr_deleter<std::FILE, std::fclose> p;
```

## Section 2.11: Template template parameters
Sometimes we would like to pass into the template a template type without fixing its values. This is what template
template parameters are created for. Very simple template template parameter examples:
```CPP
template <class T>
struct Tag1 { };
template <class T>
struct Tag2 { };
template <template <class> class Tag>
struct IntTag {
typedef Tag<int> type;
};
int main() {
IntTag<Tag1>::type t;
}
```
Version ≥ C++11
```CPP
#include <vector>
#include <iostream>
template <class T, template <class...> class C, class U>
C<T> cast_all(const C<U> &c) {
C<T> result(c.begin(), c.end());
return result;
}
int main() {
std::vector<float> vf = {1.2, 2.6, 3.7};
auto vi = cast_all<int>(vf);
for(auto &&i: vi) {
std::cout << i << std::endl;
}
}
```

## Section 2.12: Default template parameter value
Just like in case of the function arguments, template parameters can have their default values. All template
parameters with a default value have to be declared at the end of the template parameter list. The basic idea is that
the template parameters with default value can be omitted while template instantiation.
Simple example of default template parameter value usage:
```CPP
template <class T, size_t N = 10>
struct my_array {
T arr[N];
};
int main() {
/* Default parameter is ignored, N = 5 */
my_array<int, 5> a;
/* Print the length of a.arr: 5 */
std::cout << sizeof(a.arr) / sizeof(int) << std::endl;
/* Last parameter is omitted, N = 10 */
my_array<int> b;
/* Print the length of a.arr: 10 */
std::cout << sizeof(b.arr) / sizeof(int) << std::endl;
}
```